Adapt PID rulebook to latest SD-JWT VC (#160)
eu-digital-identity-wallet/eudi-doc-architecture-and-reference-framework: docs/annexes/annex-06-pid-rulebook.md

    -   Section 2.2.2 describes how Member States can specify national
        attributes by defining a domestic PID namespace.

> -   Section 2.3 specified the SD-JWT VC Type to be used for PID

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   Section 2.3 specifies the SD-JWT VC Type to be used for PID
```

> -   Section 2.3 specifies the SD-JWT VC Type to be used for PID
>     attestations in SD-JWT VC format.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
-   Section 2.3 specifies the SD-JWT VC Type to be used for PID
    in SD-JWT VC format.
```

Author: PID attestations is the term used in the rest of the document already

> EXAMPLE: The first domestic PID namespace for Germany could be
> "eu.europa.ec.eudi.pid.de.1".

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For instance, the first domestic PID namespace for Germany would be
"eu.europa.ec.eudi.pid.de.1".
```

Author: I'd rather not change the existing text in this PR.

A PID Provider that defines a domestic namespace SHALL publish the
namespace, including all data element identifiers, their definition,
presence and encoding format, on a website that is publicly available. A
central registry for such domestic namespace definitions MAY be
established in the future.

### 2.3 SD-JWT VC Type (SD-JWT VC format)
SD-JWT VC defines the Verifiable Credential Type (`vct`). A
type comes with associated metadata that, for instance, provides information about the type itself, outlines a schema detailing the claims that are optional or mandatory in the SD-JWT VC, and specifies their display methods. Additionally, a type can inherit from another type, enabling the creation of domestic types based on a broader EU-wide standard. The information regarding a type can be automatically discovered.

The information provided in this document SHALL be specified as a
Verifiable Credential Type in the format defined by SD-JWT VC, including

> a schema for PIDs, display (rendering) information, and other metadata

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
a schema for PIDs, display information, and other metadata
```

Reviewer: I like the explicit mention of rendering - we convery text and possible images for a credential

specified by SD-JWT VC. The type SHALL be identified by the URN
`urn:eu.europa.ec.eudi:pid:1`. The version number "1" in this type MAY
be used to distinguish between the first version of the PID attribute
(defined in this document) and any future version.

Domestic PID types for national attributes SHALL be defined using URLs
and extend the EU-wide PID type. More than one domestic PID type MAY be
defined per Member State. Domestic PID types SHALL specify in their Type
Metadata any additional fields/claims and MAY define display
information.

> EXAMPLE: The domestic PID namespace for Germany could be

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For instance, the domestic PID namespace for Germany could be
```

Author: As above, aligned with existing text.

`https://example.bmi.bund.de/credential/pid/1.0`, where in the metadata
of the type, the `extends` field would reference the EU-wide type
`urn:eu.europa.ec.eudi:pid:1`.

Domestic PID Type Metadata information SHALL be published at their
respective URLs as defined in the SD-JWT VC specification.

Note: It is to be discussed whether the EU-wide PID type should be

> defined using a URN or a URL.

Reviewer 3: Here I suggest to add this a note: PID rulebook has been adapted to be compatible with SD-JWT VC and to work in the direction proposed in SD-JWT VC DM.

EXAMPLE: The first domestic PID namespace for Germany could be
"eu.europa.ec.eudi.pid.de.1".

A PID Provider that defines a domestic namespace SHALL publish the
namespace, including all data element identifiers, their definition,
presence and encoding format, on a website that is publicly available. A
central registry for such domestic namespace definitions MAY be
established in the future.

### 2.3 SD-JWT VC Type (SD-JWT VC format)

> SD-JWT VC defines the concept of a Verifiable Credential Type (`vct`). A

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
SD-JWT VC defines the Verifiable Credential Type (`vct`). A
```

> type is associated with metadata defining, for example, information
> about the type, a schema defining which claims may or must appear in the
> SD-JWT VC, and how they can be displayed. A type can extend another
> type, which can be leveraged for basing domestic types on an EU-wide
> type. Type information can be discoverable in an automated fashion.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
type comes with associated metadata that, for instance, provides information about the type itself, outlines a schema detailing the claims that are optional or mandatory in the SD-JWT VC, and specifies their display methods. Additionally, a type can inherit from another type, enabling the creation of domestic types based on a broader EU-wide standard. The information regarding a type can be automatically discovered.
```

WDYT about this rewording?

    "age_birth_year": 1980,

    "address": {
        "street_address": "123 Via Appia",
        "locality": "Rome",
        "region": "Lazio",
        "postal_code": "00100",
        "country": "IT"
    },

    "nationalities": ["FR"],

    "gender": "male",

    "place_of_birth": {
        "locality": "Leipzig",
        "region": "Saxony",
        "country": "DD"
    },

    "cnf": {
        "jwk": {
            "kty": "EC",
            "crv": "P-256",
            "x": "52aDI_ur05n1f_p3jiYGUU82oKZr3m4LsAErM536crQ",
            "y": "ckhZ-KQ5aXNL91R8Eufg1aOf8Z5pZJnIvuCzNGfdnzo"
        }
    }
}
```

Note: The `cnf` claim is used for expressing key binding in SD-JWT VCs.
The example above shows a public key in JWK format.

Note: Additional technical claims are not shown here, including
references to the issuer, validity status information, and more.

##### 2.6.3.3 Further stipulations

SD-JWT VCs containing data elements in Table 1 and Table 2 SHALL be
released only in a VP Token, as specified in \[OpenID4VP\]. This means
that these data elements SHALL be signed by the PID Provider, not by the

At the discretion of the PID Provider, domestic data elements (see

> section 2.2.2) MAY be released in either a VP Token or an ID Token.

Reviewer: I guess this should be moved down?

Reviewer: The sentence before is finished after this paragraph:
```
that these data elements SHALL be signed by the PID Provider, not by the

At the discretion of the PID Provider, domestic data elements (see
section 2.2.2) MAY be released in either a VP Token or an ID Token.

Wallet Instance.
```

It looks like line 621/622 should be moved to ~629?

Author: Thanks, will fix!

this document, the corresponding rules for encoding them with JSON will
be added here.

##### 2.6.3.2 Data Element Identifer to Claim Mapping

SD-JWT encoded PID attestations SHALL use claim names registered in the JSON Web Token Claims Registry \[IANA-JWT-Claims\]. Table 3 below maps the data element identifiers from Table 1 and Table 2 above to the corresponding claim names. 

Note that a hierarchical claim name structure can be used in SD-JWT VC encoded PID attestations as SD-JWT allows for individual selective disclosure of objects and their properties. A hierarchical claim name structure is indicated by the notation `parent/child` in Table 3.

Data element identifiers not listed in Table 3 are used as defined above.

| Data Element Identifier | Claim Name | Note |
|---|---|---|
| `birth_date` | `birthdate` |  |
| `age_over_18` | `age_equal_or_over/18` | `18` property name is a string. *)|
| `age_over_NN` | `age_equal_or_over/NN` | NN property name is a string. *) |
| `family_name_birth` | `birth_family_name` | |
| `given_name_birth` | `birth_given_name` | |

> | `birth_place` | `place_of_birth/locality` | *) |

Reviewer 4: `birth_place` and `birth_city` are both mapped to `place_of_birth/locality`

Is this correct?

Reviewer 5: Have we truly identified a use case that necessitates the `birth_city` field when we already have `birth_place`?

Are there legal documents that simultaneously capture both the city and another place, and if so, is the place in this case more or less generic than the city (part of the city or region the city belongs to)? 

If not, it appears that the `birth_city` field is redundant since `birth_place` could adequately contain its value.

Removing the `birth_city` field aligns this table with IANA's `place_of_birth` definition (`locality`). 
* [IANA JWT Claims](https://www.iana.org/assignments/jwt/jwt.xhtml)
* [OpenID Connect Identity Assurance Claims](https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-4-identity-assurance-1_0-13.html#claims)

Reviewer: That would require changes to 5.1.1.2 first which seems to be outside of the scope of this PR (but I do believe would be a good idea)

Author: I agree and would support a separate PR for that.

Reviewer 4: Can I ask what is the outcome of this?

The table still contains `birth_place` and `birth_city`, both mapped to `place_of_birth.locality`.

| `birth_country` | `place_of_birth/country` | |
| `birth_state` | `place_of_birth/region` | |
| `birth_city` | `place_of_birth/locality` | |
| `resident_address` | `address/formatted` | |
| `resident_country` | `address/country` | |
| `resident_state` | `address/region` | |
| `resident_city` | `address/locality` | |
| `resident_postal_code` | `address/postal_code` | |

> | `resident_street` | `address/street_address` | *) |

Reviewer 6: Is there a reason why Table 3 uses slash `/` as the hierarchical delimiter? Dot notation `.` is more commonly used in JSON contexts. I think `address.street_address` looks more familiar than `address/street_address`.

Author: Either works for me - I'll modify to `.`

        "country": "IT"
    },

    "nationalities": ["FR"],

    "gender": "male",

    "place_of_birth": {
        "locality": "Leipzig",
        "region": "Saxony",
        "country": "DD"
    },

    "cnf": {
        "jwk": {
            "kty": "EC",
            "crv": "P-256",
            "x": "52aDI_ur05n1f_p3jiYGUU82oKZr3m4LsAErM536crQ",
            "y": "ckhZ-KQ5aXNL91R8Eufg1aOf8Z5pZJnIvuCzNGfdnzo"
        }
    }
}
```

Note: The `cnf` claim is used for expressing key binding in SD-JWT VCs.
The example above shows a public key in JWK format.

Note: Additional technical claims are not shown here, including
references to the issuer, validity status information, and more.

##### 2.6.3.3 Supplementary Details

SD-JWT Verifiable Credentials (VCs) that include the data elements listed in Table 1 and Table 2 SHALL be provided within a Verifiable Presentation (VP) Token, as outlined in the \[OpenID4VP\] specification. These specific data elements MUST be signed by the Personal Identity (PID) Provider rather than by the Wallet Instance.

At the discretion of the PID Provider, domestic data elements (see
section 2.2.2) MAY be released in either a VP Token or an ID Token.

> PID Issuers SHALL enable selective disclosure for all data elements listed in Table 1 and Table 2, with the exception of `issuance_date`, `expiry_date`, and `issuing_country`. This includes making both parent and child claims available for selective disclosure, where relevant.

Author: ```suggestion
PID Issuers SHALL enable selective disclosure for all data elements listed in Table 1 and Table 2, with the exception of `issuance_date`, `expiry_date`, and `issuing_country`. This includes making objects available for selective disclosure as well as all their child claims individually.
```

this document, the corresponding rules for encoding them with JSON will
be added here.

##### 2.6.3.2 Data Element Identifer to Claim Mapping

SD-JWT encoded PID attestations SHALL use claim names registered in the JSON Web Token Claims Registry \[IANA-JWT-Claims\]. Table 3 below maps the data element identifiers from Table 1 and Table 2 above to the corresponding claim names. 

Note that a hierarchical claim name structure can be used in SD-JWT VC encoded PID attestations as SD-JWT allows for individual selective disclosure of objects and their properties. A hierarchical claim name structure is indicated by the notation `parent/child` in Table 3.

Data element identifiers not listed in Table 3 are used as defined above.

| Data Element Identifier | Claim Name | Note |
|---|---|---|
| `birth_date` | `birthdate` |  |

> | `age_over_18` | `age_equal_or_over/18` | Note: The `18` property name is a string.|
> | `age_over_NN` | `age_equal_or_over/NN` | Note: The NN property name is a string. |

Reviewer 7: I believe age_over_18 etc. is not registered yet.

```suggestion
| `age_over_18` | `age_equal_or_over/18` | * ; `18` property name is a string.|
| `age_over_NN` | `age_equal_or_over/NN` | *; NN property name is a string. |
```

> | `age_over_18` | `age_equal_or_over/18` | Note: The `18` property name is a string.|
> | `age_over_NN` | `age_equal_or_over/NN` | Note: The NN property name is a string. |
> | `family_name_birth` | `birth_family_name` | |
> | `given_name_birth` | `birth_given_name` | |
> | `birth_place` | `place_of_birth/locality` | * |
> | `birth_country` | `place_of_birth/country` | |
> | `birth_state` | `place_of_birth/region` | |
> | `birth_city` | `place_of_birth/locality` | |
> | `resident_address` | `address/formatted` | |
> | `resident_country` | `address/country` | |
> | `resident_state` | `address/region` | |
> | `resident_city` | `address/locality` | |
> | `resident_postal_code` | `address/postal_code` | |
> | `resident_street` | `address/street_address` | * |
> | `resident_house_number` | `address/house_number` | * |
> | `gender` | `gender` | Note: Data type mismatch - JWT claims use `male`, `female` and custom text values.* |
> | `nationality` | `nationalities` | Note: Defined as an array, here containing only one entry.|

Reviewer 7: I believe age_over_18 etc. is not registered yet. Also removed the unnecessary "Note" occurrences since the column header mentions that already.

```suggestion
| `age_over_18` | `age_equal_or_over/18` | `18` property name is a string. *)|
| `age_over_NN` | `age_equal_or_over/NN` | NN property name is a string. *) |
| `family_name_birth` | `birth_family_name` | |
| `given_name_birth` | `birth_given_name` | |
| `birth_place` | `place_of_birth/locality` | *) |
| `birth_country` | `place_of_birth/country` | |
| `birth_state` | `place_of_birth/region` | |
| `birth_city` | `place_of_birth/locality` | |
| `resident_address` | `address/formatted` | |
| `resident_country` | `address/country` | |
| `resident_state` | `address/region` | |
| `resident_city` | `address/locality` | |
| `resident_postal_code` | `address/postal_code` | |
| `resident_street` | `address/street_address` | *) |
| `resident_house_number` | `address/house_number` | *) |
| `gender` | `gender` | Data type mismatch - JWT claims use `male`, `female` and custom text values. *) |
| `nationality` | `nationalities` | Defined as an array, here containing only one entry. |
```

> | `issuance_date` | `iat` | |
> | `expiry_date` | `exp` | |

Author: ```suggestion
| `issuance_date` | `iat` | Data type: NumericDate as defined in RFC7519 |
| `expiry_date` | `exp` | Data type: NumericDate as defined in RFC7519 |
```

    "given_name": "Jean",
    "family_name": "Dupont",
    "birthdate": "1980-05-23",

    "age_equal_or_over": {
        "12": true,
        "14": true,
        "16": true,
        "18": true,
        "21": true,
        "65": false
    },
    "age_in_years": 44,
    "age_birth_year": 1980,

    "address": {
        "street_address": "123 Via Appia",
        "locality": "Rome",
        "region": "Lazio",
        "postal_code": "00100",
        "country": "IT"
    },

    "nationalities": ["FR"],

    "gender": "male",

    "place_of_birth": {
        "locality": "Leipzig",
        "region": "Saxony",
        "country": "DD"
    },

    "cnf": {
        "jwk": {
            "kty": "EC",
            "crv": "P-256",
            "x": "52aDI_ur05n1f_p3jiYGUU82oKZr3m4LsAErM536crQ",
            "y": "ckhZ-KQ5aXNL91R8Eufg1aOf8Z5pZJnIvuCzNGfdnzo"
        }
    }
}
```

Note: The `cnf` claim is used for expressing key binding in SD-JWT VCs.
The example above shows a public key in JWK format.

Note: Additional technical claims are not shown here, including
references to the issuer, validity status information, and more.

> ##### 2.6.3.3 Further stipulations

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
##### 2.6.3.3 Supplementary Details
```

> SD-JWT VCs containing data elements in Table 1 and Table 2 SHALL be
> released only in a VP Token, as specified in \[OpenID4VP\]. This means
> that these data elements SHALL be signed by the PID Provider, not by the
> Wallet Instance.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
SD-JWT Verifiable Credentials (VCs) that include the data elements listed in Table 1 and Table 2 SHALL be provided within a Verifiable Presentation (VP) Token, as outlined in the [OpenID4VP] specification. These specific data elements MUST be signed by the Personal Identity (PID) Provider rather than by the Wallet Instance.
```

Author: ```suggestion
SD-JWT Verifiable Credentials (VCs) that include the data elements listed in Table 1 and Table 2 SHALL be provided within a Verifiable Presentation (VP) Token, as outlined in the \[OpenID4VP\] specification. These specific data elements MUST be signed by the Personal Identity (PID) Provider rather than by the Wallet Instance.
```

At the discretion of the PID Provider, domestic data elements (see
section 2.2.2) MAY be released in either a VP Token or an ID Token.

PID Issuers SHALL make all data elements in Table 1 and Table 2 except
for `issuance_date`, `expiry_date` and `issuing_country` available for

> selective disclosure, including parent and child claims where

Reviewer 4: I was wondering whether rulebook should be explicit not only if elements are always or selectively disclosable, but in addition in the SD case, which sd-jwt option (flat, structured, recursive) should be used for every element (especial objects and arrays)

Author: This is covered by the sentence specifying that parent and child elements shall be selectively disclosable, which implies the "recursive" option. (Note, that SD-JWT doesn't specify the three options you listed, it just uses them as examples. Therefore I didn't use the word "recursive" here.)

Reviewer 4: > This is covered by the sentence specifying that parent and child elements shall be selectively disclosable, which implies the "recursive" option. 

The "parent and child elements shall be selectively disclosable" is also satisfied with "structured" option, IMO, for objects that have only a single level of children (like `address`). So I think it would be better to explicitly specified.
 
Note: Indeed I have the feeling that SD-JWT lacks some terminology as to how you calculate disclosures (for both objects, arrays) with these 3 options. Examples are not enough, because as in this case somebody cannot formally refer to them.

Author: I added a change proposal to the text to make the wording more clear. Please let me know what you think!

The lack of a naming for the options in SD-JWT is very much intentional. The options are just meant as examples, not to say that a credential has to follow one principle or the other. Instead, for every element individually, the issuer has to decide whether to make it selectively disclosable or not.

> PID Issuers SHALL make all data elements in Table 1 and Table 2 except
> for `issuance_date`, `expiry_date` and `issuing_country` available for
> selective disclosure, including parent and child claims where
> applicable.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
PID Issuers are required to enable selective disclosure for all data elements listed in Table 1 and Table 2, with the exception of issuance_date, expiry_date, and issuing_country. This includes making both parent and child claims available for selective sharing, where relevant.
```

Author: ```suggestion
PID Issuers SHALL enable selective disclosure for all data elements listed in Table 1 and Table 2, with the exception of `issuance_date`, `expiry_date`, and `issuing_country`. This includes making both parent and child claims available for selective disclosure, where relevant.
```
